Gardens in the Islamic world, especially ones mentioned in classic stories, were often places filled with
music and song. In the 13th-century Arabic story, Bayad and Riyad, a young man and woman cleverly flirt
with each other in a social gathering by singing passionate songs to one another. They are in a palace
garden surrounded by people, but this does not stop them.
The story unfolds in the palace of an important official in Andalusia, Spain, where Muslim courts ruled.
The official’s daughter is the lady of the household, and she feels very protective of her female servants
and their honour.
As the noblewoman is offered wine, she surveys her servants and notices that their eyes are fixed
adoringly on a handsome young man named Bayad, who is visiting from Damascus. He plays an oud, a
stringed Middle Eastern instrument similar to a guitar.
Bayad had already fallen in love with one of the young women in the group. It was love at first sight, and
her name was Riyad. A song about piercing eyes and desire had just finished when Bayad was invited to
sing. The song he performed included the lines: “Love holds absolute power over my soul, A power that would make the hardest iron melt.”
Courtyard palace gardens, like the one pictured here, were a popular feature in the palaces of Muslim and
Christian rulers of medieval Spain. Often planted with orange and myrtle trees, they were places of
relaxation and romance to enjoy both company and song.